now some of the most vulnerable victims
of Israel's war on Gaza are pregnant
women and the continuing attacks are
causing an increasing number of
miscarriages and premature births the UN
estimates that around 50,000 women in
Gaza are pregnant and around 180 of them
are reaching their due dates every day
the Palestinian Ministry of Health says
it's documented hundreds of miscarriages
and premature births often in unsanitary
conditions Palestinian doctors say
malnutrition is also contributing to the
miscarriages with mothers facing
complications because they don't have
enough to eat and are unable to reach
Emergency Care let's speak to Dr Tanya
Hajj Hassan about this she's a Pediatric
Intensive Care doctor working with msf
Doctors Without Borders and she's
joining us from Aman Dr Tanya very good
to have you again on Al jazer so a sharp
increase in the number of miscarriages
among pregnant women in Gaza an increase
in the premature births
why is this happening what is it like if
you're a pregnant woman today in
Gaza yeah thank you fully um so there's
clear evidence that you end up with an
increased race rate of miscarriage still
birth pre-term birth and small for
gestation or small for the age uh of the
baby uh so baby's born too small for for
their age in settings in humanitarian
settings particularly
conflict uh whether are under an
enormous amount of stress and I can talk
about that in a second and that
compromises a lot of things including
the blood supply to the baby the
mother's health uh and ultimately how
early the baby's delivered or whether
the baby survives so babies are often uh
born um Dead uh or die within the womb
and the mother has a miscarriage uh or
they're born too early too small and the
consequences of a baby born too early
too small are increased death after
birth so increased Neal death chronic
illness uh into childhood and even into
adulthood including developmental delay
so you end up with a reduced life
expectancy in a lot of
cases we know that the maternal and
neonatal death rates are going to
Skyrocket unfortunately gaza's Health
Ministry has been unable to compile data
for infant maternal mortality during the
assault right but doctor Aid groups all
say that miscarriages and still births
have spiked
they're talking about they're talking
about hundreds of cases right now of
these miscarriages the Gaza Health
Ministry do you think this is just a tip
of the iceberg and it could be many many
more absolutely I mean there's no data
from the north uh barely any from the
middle middle areas of Gaza and in the
South we know that the majority of women
are not actually delivering in
healthcare facilities there's one
remaining small Hospital in the South
that is uh providing most of the
maternal
care for a population of over 2 million
and like I said 50,000 women who are
expecting um and I you know I think the
figure is close 140 150 women delivering
day right um I can talk to a little bit
bit about the Journey of pregnant women
in Gaza from the stories that we've
heard both from msf colleagues and other
medical professionals in the Gaza Strip
pregnant women are experiencing the same
horrors of of of the all of the civilian
in the Gaza Strip so they are fearing
for their own lives they're fearing for
the lives of their children they're
being bombarded indiscriminately and
we've had stories of pregnant women
who've lost multiple members of their
family including their their husband the
father of their unborn child they're uh
displaced right often living in a tent
with no heat no access to clean water or
food and a malnourished pregnant mother
dehydrated mother is is a danger to her
and her baby in all trimester ERS and
then when it comes and and a lot of them
are are being killed during pregnancy
we've had numerous stories of what are
called postpartum cesarian sections so
cesarian sections that are done in a
mother that has died right and we do
them as fast as possible it's an
emergency procedure to try and extract
the baby and get oxygen into that baby
before they die most of those will be
unsuccessful and both the mother and the
baby will succumb that it's just
incredible what you're describing there
Dr Tanya let me just ask you a little
bit more about the miscarriages because
of course many women around the world
suffer
miscarriages but to go through it in the
context of a war is is just unimaginable
what does this kind of traumatic crisis
have um the impact of it have on the
health of women their physical health of
women in Gaza but also on their mental
well-being in
particular yeah you know fully I'm
I'm at a loss for words I you know I get
asked about specific types of trauma on
specific individuals they're
experiencing every possible type of
trauma physical psychological like I you
know I just received a message this
morning from a colleague of mine who's a
female doctor in Gaza and uh we were
just joking around uh she's unmarried
and uh she said you know I'm I'm
thanking God right now that I don't have
children being a mother in Gaza right
now is uh Beyond imagination having to
worry about yourself about about the
health of your baby um and I think you
know I would agree with that another
colleague of ours a nurse uh early on uh
had sent a message
saying uh that essentially my hope is
that if I get
killed uh um sorry my hope is that I get
killed with my children
altogether so let me let me read you the
exact message so um I really convey uh
the horror of that this mother exper was
experiencing yeah she said my hope is to
die with all my children and not leave
them and them not leave me I cannot live
without them and I do not want to die
and leave them here in this unjust world
this is a nurse colleague and I think
that's the sentiment that a lot of
mothers are are carrying you know about
two mothers are dying every are being
killed every hour that's approxim 48
mothers per day there are
20,000
um uh um babies that have been born I
mean about about 180 babies born today
born into this into a life where they
have no access uh consistent access to
breast milk because the mothers are
dehydrated and malnourished there's no
formula there's a a shortage of diapers
colleagues in Gaza have reached out you
know when I asked ask them what do they
need most just so we can try and
coordinate Aid and and they say we need
formula we need formula for the babies
the babies are malnourished we need um
yeah diapers we don't diapers it's
really unimaginable what what these
children and women are going through
right now in Gaza Dr Tanya as always
very good to talk to you thank you so
much for sharing these experiences with
us Dr Tanya Haan yeah thank you thank
you for having me on I I just want to
add one last thing you know we as
humanitarian professionals are asked to
come on and and describe this suffering
over and over because people are calling
this a humanitarian crisis a
humanitarian crisis implies a
humanitarian solution there is no safe
humanitarian space right now in Gaza
there's also no humanitarian solution
for something that's so catastrophic
right the only solution is a ceasefire
and and then an immense amount of
humanitarian Aid to relieve all the
suffering that I and so many others
continue to describe to you on this show
thank you for giving us the space to do
that I just want to ask everybody please
amplify your voices put pressure our
colleagues in Gaza are exhausted we
cannot afford to be exhausted too the
world needs to understand to stop now
thank you so much dror Tanya thank you
for joining us on Al jazer Tanya haassan
a ped Pediatric Intensive Care doctor
joining us here from
Aman thanks fly